welcome to our we are bbc good food
series in which we introduce you to our
team and contributors
i'm keith kendrick magazine's editor and
i'm delighted to welcome riaz phillips
riaz is a writer photographer and video
maker his first book belly full shown a
light on caribbean food in the uk
three years ago he won a young british
foodie award and his youtube videos
which explore the tropical world have
received 1.5 million views
riaz is featured in the august issue of
good food with his latest book community
comfort
but more of that shortly hi riaz how are
you doing
hey dan thanks for having me yeah well
thanks for being here i believe you're
uh you're in germany at the moment
you've sort of moved over there for a
while
yeah i just uh changed the scenery
yeah well change is as good as a rest eh
so uh is it uh is it is it working out
okay over there
yeah i mean they've managed things a bit
differently from
how the uk has so i feel like people are
slightly more relaxed here
even though they're following rules
quite stringently in public spaces
i think all and there's a lot more
kind of vast public spaces for people to
explore and kind of separate from other
people so you can still
kind of enjoy nature and stuff and not
be very close to other people so
i think it's one of the fortunes of the
big landmass of the country
yeah i mean we're all trying to find our
way and adjusting along the way aren't
we
well let's uh let's go back to uh to the
beginning with you how did you first
become interested in cooking
um because people used to cook for me
and i used to eat the food
and so i guess i never became
as interested in cooking myself as in
the process behind the cooking
and the kind of ideas behind the cooking
and history
and the culture behind the cooking which
really started a couple years ago
when i made my first book 34 caribbean
food in uk
and that book was sort of a homage to my
grandma who was from jamaica
and when she passed away i realized i
didn't know much about her heritage or
where she came from or why she came to
this country
so i kind of wanted to speak to people
from her generation
and from families of that generation
and learn more about them as a range of
and of learning more about my
own history and culture and that's kind
of how it started
through that i learned more about
the food and i could see that the food
there wasn't just food it was politics
it was community it was economics it was
history it was culture and that's kind
of
when i really got interested so uh you
must have come across some incredible
people and incredible dishes
in that time does any spring to mind
i think one that's super interesting to
me is the food from guyana
there's a few takeaways in london where
the proprietors are from guyan and guy
and there's a really interesting country
people don't know it's in south america
and it's technically always been seen as
part of the caribbean
even though geographically is in south
america
sharing a border with suriname and
brazil you've got neighbors to one side
who speak dutch neighbors to another
side who speak portuguese neighbors to
another side who speak spanish
and the food is a mix match with all
those cultures
in addition to the aftermath of the kind
of british empire there
so there's a strong asian community
there's a strong chinese community
as well as the kind of african community
and that makes really really interesting
food
can you give us an example of a a
typical
guyanese dish so
they probably one of the famous ones is
probably
roti so inside roti
roti is like a flatbread which has its
roots in
kind of indian subcontinent and inside
that you'd probably get something like
chana
and allu which people who are from the
indian subculture again would recognize
those those dishes are something that
they can kind of identify with so
china's basically like chickpea curry
uh and i lose like potato curry
and so yeah you get all those in the
roti kind of wrapped up
and yeah taste amazing it sounds amazing
do they use the same kind of
spices that you have in india or is it
is that other kind of specific spices to
uh
to guyanese cooking
yeah a lot of the spices you find are
similar so stuff like kind of
all spice um or all-purpose seasoning
which is a
kind of collection of five spices all
those things are something that people
from that
part of the world would recognize as
much as caribbeans would recognize them
because a lot of those spices were stuff
that were brought over by the english
to those regions or even brought over by
the people themselves to that region
so lots of influences from different
parts of the of the world and their and
their neighbors it's uh it's interesting
isn't it how food
comes together i think that moves nicely
into your uh your
your big project that's um that's
ongoing now which is
your community comfort cookbook and
you've brought together
i think it's about a hundred um uh
you know cooks entrepreneurs artisans uh
you know influencers
chefs from uh different uh ethnic
minority
backgrounds all into one place sharing
their recipes
right across the board and many people
born in the uk many people coming from
from overseas
uh what was that for what's it for and
how did you um
you know how did you bring it all
together
well yeah i guess at the beginning of
lockdown when the news came out that
the coveted 19 was specifically
had an adverse effect on black and asian
communities
more so than others i know a lot of us
from within those communities felt
really depressed and despondent and
kind of didn't know what to do and
wanted to do something to kind of help
out
i know me especially i kind of kind of
kicked the ball around for ages just
thinking about what i could do to help
out and
i noticed that on social media i follow
a lot of through channels
and i saw that a lot of people were kind
of taking the time and lockdown to go
back and explore their heritage foods
whether that was a means of escapism or
just using the time to kind of learn
more about
their heritage that they didn't have
time to before
and i noticed there was a similar strain
of
comfort food in all of these different
posts even though the food
at times was wildly different it all
seemed to be coming from the same place
of
comfort food and people kind of going
back to these foods
for different reasons and all the foods
had different meanings whether that was
nostalgia or
taste or memories that all kind of well
these foods really meant something to
people
and i found it interesting that these
communities where
this food was coming from have been so
prevalent in the uk for decades but
the representation of the same food and
communities hasn't kind of matched the
levels of
how much people there are or how strong
those communities are in this country
and coincidentally those same
communities were the same ones who were
being negatively infected by
covert 19 and so i kind of wanted to
bring all these kind of
thoughts together into one place where i
could try and raise some
some funds for charity well you've had
an amazing reception and we we're
featuring uh
recipes um in in the august issue of
good food and i'm just looking
now we've got a lemon uh loaf cake from
ravny
gill and um brown crab
arroz caldo from mary san pablo and your
own
slow stew peas can you uh can you give
us
a story behind the influence of your
slow stew peas recipe
yes i guess the initial influence from
that comes from my mum who
that's the kind of first time i had the
dish and i reminded it
really reminds me of kind of going back
home after i moved out
especially in the wintertime it's
something that will be cooking
on the stove in a big pressure pot
and it's a really amazing concoction of
the vegetables starchy root vegetables
um usually meat but the version that i
made
doesn't have meat in it which was
inspired by my time spending
so my time with the rest of our
community in jamaica
of our community that have been
preaching about
veganism for nearly a century now
due to their religion they don't eat any
animal byproducts
and so when you have food cooked by them
you see the amount of flavor that they
can pack into vegetable dishes is
incredible and it's really inspiring
and so that's kind of where i got the
emphasis to make this a vegan dish
when you go to jamaica it's something
that you see
almost everywhere on the island and you
see
people from all over the spectrum
whether they're wealthy people who live
in mansions
or the people who live downtown they
usually will go to the same
[Music]
soup vendor on the roadsides who are
just charging 150 american dollars which
is about
one pound or less um and all these
people from different classes are all
getting the same
the same soup i thought there was
something amazing about that
that there was no kind of amount of
wealth that could transform this fish
into something more gourmet or more
spectacular or more amazing
it sounds incredible there's one
ingredient in it that i've never heard
of before and it's called i think it's
coyote is that how it's uh
pronounced c-h-a-y-o
um as i say i've never come across yeah
tell us about that what is it exactly
is um we call it chojo yeah
and it's one of the interesting things
about
when i was compiling this book is that a
lot of these
fruits and vegetables that we kind of
know in our own communities that we
think are kind of exclusive to our
communities when you look at some of the
other recipes
you see something that you don't know
what it is and you kind of look it up
and you're like oh wow that's what we
call this or that's what they call this
and
that's amazing to see and chocho was one
of those things
and yeah church was kind of it's really
hard to explain
so it almost looks like a savory pear
right but yeah it's really dense and
when it's cooked down sometimes you
confuse it for the potato pieces
because it kind of has that same
translucent look
to it but yeah once you cook it down
yeah it really absorbs the flavors it
has a different texture
profile than the yam and the potatoes
and it kind of yeah adds to the profile
of the dish
so really worth seeking out then for
something um you know very very special
especially for something which is a kind
of a slow cook vegetable
stew which you would more associate with
meat kind of um
uh meaty kind of ingredients so that
sounds that sounds fantastic
okay what i'm going to ask you now just
before we wrap up is uh
we'd love to know about who who your
favorite cooks or chefs or
influencers are that we should seek out
on instagram and follow you know because
uh we we we're finding more and more uh
people in the world of food that are
bringing so much
uh diversity and experience and richness
to
what's going on in our kitchens and
let's face it we've had a lot more time
in our kitchens
so we want to broaden our horizons who
should we be following riaz
um i think one of my favorite
i've got like a kind of i like people
who do really
kind of homely food as well as people
who do
really gourmet food that you can kind of
never cook at home but you almost aspire
to
and so one of my favorite people is
called kareem roberts
and he goes under the name broke dinner
i'm writing these down yeah and so
here's
yeah all the people i'm going to be a
bit biased and all the people i'm going
to mention to you are people who have
recipes and community comfort
uh the reason i reached out to them was
because i really admired their work and
so yeah that's how it kind of came
together
uh so he's a professional chef who
makes the most amazing artistic food
in his in his of that kind of home setup
and what he transforms from just
basic bits of meat and basic bits of
vegetable and fruit
on these plates is just artwork to me
it's fascinating
and when it comes to the kind of
diversity in the upper echelon of food i
think that it's not that well
represented different people from
different backgrounds
in this country as well just from my own
personal experiences of looking at
that kind of spectrum of food and so to
see someone from
caribbean heritage doing that level of
kind of artistic artisanal food is
is amazing and it's really inspirational
and then another person who i really
like at the moment is a guy called ramon
who goes under the name of rg vegan
and every day he posts
the most mouth-watering rainbow
big platters of vegan foods
and there's something about when you see
big platters of vegan food
that even if it might slightly be
unhealthy or some of it might be fried
there's something about the
fact that it's vegan that just makes you
want to eat it all and not have any
guilt behind it
and again just kind of
displaying it's kind of like the other
side of displaying
all these caribbean foods like plantain
and yams and
choco and all these amazing things into
a way that people can kind of understand
but just a different way of doing it
and so
[Music]
yvonne maxwell who goes on the moniker
spot
she's a kind of cook an adventurer and
traveler as well
and she's of west african and caribbean
descent
and i think that mixture allows her to
have a really good
understanding of a wide wealth of food
and so the way that she engages
with food and explores and does
photography and
documentation is really fascinating
and as well as being an amazing cook as
well brilliant
and of course people should follow you
uh which i do and you've got some
fantastic stuff on your
uh on your social media challenge
channels uh
what i would like you to uh to explain
to people where they can get hold of
community comfort because it's important
that
they can you know seek it out and try it
themselves
so community comfort is available at
tazettapress.com
which is t-e-z-e-t-a press.com
which is actually my own imprint that i
set up
because i couldn't find anyone to
publish or have
any interest in belly full at the time
when i was creating and trying to make
it
so i had the idea that i could kind of
make this small imprint to
publish books by myself or others who
kind of fall underneath the same
[Music]
umbrella of trying to represent
unrepresented
foods and under the radar foods and food
communities
in england and other parts of the
diaspora
and so with 100 chefs i thought it was
fair to price it at 10 pounds
so people can make a 10 pound donation
and then they'll receive the digital
cookbook
but if people would like to make a
donation of more than 10 pounds
they're more than likely to as all the
proceeds all the proceeds are going to
charity a charity called uber initiative
which upper fund called the majonzi fund
and this fund is going towards
helping people have access to money
so that they can create memorial
services remembrance services
and also the friends and families of
lost ones
and access therapy and also using the
money
to help address awareness of mental
health
in those same communities black and
asian communities who really
don't have an understanding or
comprehension
of therapy and mental health
and so i thought it was really uh
interesting that they were looking at
the
kind of long-term effects of covert that
we kind of can't really see because
we're still right in the thick of it so
it's hard for us to see
kind of end game or uh the other side
almost
and i thought it was really good that
they were
yeah almost looking at that other side
and kind of helping people
through yeah yeah tough times
thanks for yes i really appreciate you
sharing your
experience your knowledge um your
expertise your you know
all those kind of people that you
brought together um
and you know riaz's community comfort um
extracts from his book are in the august
issue of good food which is on sale
now um also don't forget you can hear
more from bbc good food on our weekly
bbc good food podcast with tom carriage
where we discuss everything from baking
to barbecue so you can find that online
at bbcgoodfood.com
thanks again riaz and have a great day
over there
in in germany take care thanks for
having me thank you so much